=head1 NAME

febootstrap-run - Run extra commands in febootstrap root filesystem

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 febootstrap-run [--options] DIR [--] [CMD ...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This can be used to run extra commands in the febootstrap root
filesystem.  It is just a simple wrapper around the standard
C<fakeroot> and C<fakechroot> commands.

If given, the C<CMD ...> is run inside the root filesystem.  The
command acts as if it was run as root and chrooted into the root
filesystem.

If the command is omitted, then we start a shell.

If C<CMD ...> could contain anything starting with a C<-> character
then use C<--> to separate C<febootstrap-run> parameters from the
command:

 febootstrap-run ./f10 -- ls -l

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<--ro>

Usually any changes to permissions made by the command are recorded in
the C<fakeroot.log> file.  However if C<--ro> flag is given, then
changes to permissions are not recorded.  (Note: changes to file
contents still happen).

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

Remove a directory subtree safely:

 febootstrap-run initramfs -- rm -r /etc

(This requires that you have a compatible 'rm' command in the root).

Another way to do complex operations from a script is to export a
function:

 #!/bin/bash

 do_stuff ()
 {
     # complex operations inside the root
 }
 export -f do_stuff
 febootstrap-run root -- bash -c do_stuff

=head1 ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

Some L<fakechroot(1)> environment variables are applicable.  In
particular you may want to set:

 export FAKECHROOT_EXCLUDE_PATH=/proc

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<febootstrap(8)>,
L<febootstrap-install(8)>,
L<fakeroot(1)>,
L<fakechroot(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones <rjones @ redhat . com>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

(C) Copyright 2009 Red Hat Inc.,
L<http://et.redhat.com/~rjones/febootstrap>.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
